Redo + refresh + update the CNI doc (#15282)
istio/istio.io: content/en/docs/setup/additional-setup/cni/index.md

---
title: Install the Istio CNI component

> description: Install and use the Istio CNI component, allowing operators to deploy workloads with lower privilege.

Reviewer: Is `operators` valid since it can be deployed by the `cni` Helm chart as well? I guess the Operator and istioctl use the Helm chart.

weight: 70
aliases:
    - /docs/setup/kubernetes/additional-setup/cni
    - /docs/setup/additional-setup/cni
keywords: [cni]
owner: istio/wg-networking-maintainers
test: yes
---

> `istio-cni` is a Istio node agent DaemonSet that runs in your cluster. It is used by both Istio {{< gloss >}}data plane{{< /gloss >}} modes.
> 
> `istio-cni` runs in your cluster with elevated privileges, and is used to configure traffic redirection
> for pods in the Istio mesh.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`istio-cni` is an agent which is used to configure traffic redirection for pods in the mesh. It runs as a DaemonSet, on every node, with elevated privileges. `istio-cni` is used by both Istio {{< gloss >}}data plane{{< /gloss >}} modes.
```

> For the {{< gloss >}}sidecar{{< /gloss >}} data plane mode, it is optional, and removes the requirement of running privileged init containers in every pod in the mesh, replacing that model with a single privileged node agent pod on each Kubernetes node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the {{< gloss >}}sidecar{{< /gloss >}} data plane mode, `istio-cni` is optional. It removes the requirement of running privileged init containers in every pod in the mesh, replacing that model with a single privileged node agent pod on each Kubernetes node.
```

> For the {{< gloss >}}ambient{{< /gloss >}} data plane mode, it is the only supported mechanism, and must be installed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `istio-cni` agent is **required** in the {{< gloss >}}ambient{{< /gloss >}} data plane mode.
```

This guide is focused on using the `istio-cni` component as an optional part of the sidecar data plane mode. Consult [the ambient docs](/docs/ambient/) for information on using the ambient data plane mode.

> 

Reviewer 2: put a heading here

```suggestion
# `istio-cni` and CNI plugins
```

(p.s. it bugs me that we use `backticks` throughout.  Do we have a precedent that would just let us call it istio-cni?  We don't do the same with istiod, do we? We do call it "Istiod", which I don't like.  I tried to always use lowercase-zed in ztunnel.)

Author: I think we have the headings correct here now? It looks reasonable the way we have it here anyway, LMK if you want additional heading tweaks here.

Reviewer 2: reined a couple in

`istio-cni` makes use of the Container Network Interface ([CNI](https://www.cni.dev/)) plugin API to extend the primary CNI already running in your Kubernetes cluster.

{{< tip >}}

> Note: The `istio-cni` component is not a CNI. Among other things, it installs a chained CNI plugin, which is designed to be layered on top of another, previously-installed primary interface CNI, such as [Calico](https://docs.projectcalico.org), or the cluster CNI used by your cloud provider.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note: The `istio-cni` component is _not_ a CNI plugin in the common usage of the term. Among other things, it installs a _chained_ CNI plugin, which is designed to be layered on top of another, previously-installed primary interface CNI, such as [Calico](https://docs.projectcalico.org), or the cluster CNI used by your cloud provider.
```

perhaps lift what I wrote for the glossary and put it here?

Author: I had missed/forgot that you had, lemme rework.

For the {{< gloss >}}sidecar{{< /gloss >}} data plane mode, the Istio CNI node agent is optional. It removes the requirement of running privileged init containers in every pod in the mesh, replacing that model with a single privileged node agent pod on each Kubernetes node.

The Istio CNI node agent is **required** in the {{< gloss >}}ambient{{< /gloss >}} data plane mode.

This guide is focused on using the Istio CNI node agent as an optional part of the sidecar data plane mode. Consult [the ambient docs](/docs/ambient/) for information on using the ambient data plane mode.

{{< tip >}}
Note: The Istio CNI node agent _does not_ replace your cluster's existing {{< gloss="cni" >}}CNI{{< /gloss >}}. Among other things, it installs a _chained_ CNI plugin, which is designed to be layered on top of another, previously-installed primary interface CNI, such as [Calico](https://docs.projectcalico.org), or the cluster CNI used by your cloud provider.
See [compatibility with CNIs](#compatibility-with-other-cni-plugins) for details.
{{< /tip >}}

Follow this guide to install, configure, and use the Istio CNI node agent with the sidecar data plane mode.

> ## Sidecar traffic redirection without the Istio CNI node agent

Reviewer 2: I get that we're trying to make sure people know this page is only about sidecars, but it makes for some long headlines.  How about...
```suggestion
## How sidecar traffic redirection works

## Using the init container (without the Istio CNI node agent)
```

By default Istio injects an init container, `istio-init`, in pods deployed in
the mesh. The `istio-init` container sets up the pod network traffic
redirection to/from the Istio sidecar proxy. This requires the user or
service-account deploying pods to the mesh to have sufficient Kubernetes RBAC
permissions to deploy [containers with the `NET_ADMIN` and `NET_RAW` capabilities](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/security-context/#set-capabilities-for-a-container).

> ## Sidecar traffic redirection with the Istio CNI node agent

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Using the Istio CNI node agent
```

Requiring Istio users to have elevated Kubernetes RBAC permissions is
problematic for some organizations' security compliance, as is the requirement to deploy privileged init containers with every workload.

The `istio-cni` node agent is effectively a replacement for the `istio-init` container that enables the same
networking functionality, but without requiring the use or deployment of privileged init containers in every workload.

> Instead, `istio-cni` itself runs as a single privileged pod on the node. It uses this privilege to install a [chained CNI plugin](https://www.cni.dev/docs/spec/#section-2-execution-protocol) on the node, which is invoked after your "primary" interface CNI plugin. CNI plugins are invoked dynamically by Kubernetes as a privileged process on the host node whenever a new pod is created, and are able to configure pod networking.

Reviewer 2: Make this paragraph a run-on from the previous (as starting a new section with Instead doesn't read well.)

(GitHub wouldn't let me "suggest" across the blank line that remains, I'm sorry.)

The Istio chained CNI plugin always runs after the primary interface plugins, identifies user application pods with sidecars requiring traffic redirection, and sets up redirection in the Kubernetes pod lifecycle's network setup phase, thereby removing the need for privileged init containers, as well as the [requirement for `NET_ADMIN` and `NET_RAW` capabilities](/docs/ops/deployment/application-requirements/)
for users and pod deployments.

{{< image width="60%" link="./cni.svg" caption="Istio CNI" >}}

> ## Prerequisites for using the Istio CNI node agent

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Prerequisites for use
```

    * AWS EKS, Azure AKS, and IBM Cloud IKS clusters have this capability.
    * Google Cloud GKE clusters have CNI enabled when any of the following features are enabled:
       [network policy](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/network-policy),
       [intranode visibility](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/intranode-visibility),
       [workload identity](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/workload-identity),
       [pod security policy](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/pod-security-policies#overview),
       or [dataplane v2](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/concepts/dataplane-v2).
    * Kind has CNI enabled by default.
    * OpenShift has CNI enabled by default.

1. Install Kubernetes with the [ServiceAccount admission controller](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/admission-controllers/#serviceaccount) enabled.
    * The Kubernetes documentation highly recommends this for all Kubernetes installations
      where `ServiceAccounts` are utilized.

> ### Install Istio with the `istio-cni` component

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Installing the node agent

### Install Istio with the `istio-cni` component
```

{{< tip >}}
You can install `istio-cni` into any Kubernetes namespace, but the namespace must allow pods with the `system-node-critical` PriorityClass to be scheduled in it. Some cloud providers (notably GKE) by default disallow the scheduling of `system-node-critical` pods in any namespace but specific ones, such as `kube-system`.

You may either install `istio-cni` into `kube-system`, or (recommended) define a ResourceQuota for your GKE cluster that allows the use of `system-node-critical` pods inside `istio-system`. See [here](/docs/ambient/install/platform-prerequisites#google-kubernetes-engine-gke) for more details.
{{< /tip >}}

Note that if installing `istiod` with the Helm chart according to the [Install with Helm](/docs/setup/install/helm/#installation-steps) guide, you must install `istiod` with the following extra override value, in order to disable the privileged init container injection:

{{< text syntax=bash snip_id=cni_agent_helm_istiod_install >}}
$ helm install istiod istio/istiod -n istio-system --set pilot.cni.enabled=true --wait
{{< /text >}}

> #### Additional configuration for the `istio-cni` component

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Additional configuration
```

If an application pod starts up during this time, it is possible that traffic redirection is not properly set up and traffic would be able to bypass the Istio sidecar.

This race condition is mitigated for the sidecar data plane mode by a "detect and repair" method.
Please take a look at [race condition & mitigation](#race-condition--mitigation) section to understand the implication of this mitigation, and for configuration instructions
{{< /tip >}}

#### Handling init container injection for revisions

When installing revisioned control planes with the CNI component enabled,
`values.pilot.cni.enabled=true` needs to be set for each installed revision, so that the sidecar injector does not attempt inject the `istio-init` init container for that revision.

{{< text yaml >}}
apiVersion: install.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: IstioOperator
spec:
  revision: REVISION_NAME
  ...
  values:
    pilot:
      cni:
        enabled: true
  ...
{{< /text >}}

The CNI plugin at version `1.x` is compatible with control plane at version `1.x-1`, `1.x`, and `1.x+1`,
which means CNI and control plane can be upgraded in any order, as long as their version difference is within one minor version.

> ### Upgrading the `istio-cni` component

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Operating clusters with the CNI agent installed
### Upgrading
```

{{< tab name="Helm" category-value="helm" >}}

{{< text bash >}}
$ helm install istio-cni istio/cni -n istio-system --wait
{{< /text >}}

{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabset >}}

This will deploy an `istio-cni` DaemonSet into the cluster, which will create one Pod on every active node, deploy the Istio CNI plugin binary on each, and set up the necessary node-level configuration for the plugin.
The CNI DaemonSet runs with [`system-node-critical`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/guaranteed-scheduling-critical-addon-pods/) `PriorityClass`. This is because it is the only means of actually reconfiguring pod networking to add them to the Istio mesh.

{{< tip >}}

> You can install `istio-cni` into any Kubernetes namespace, but the namespace must allow pods with the `system-node-critical` PriorityClass to be scheduled in it. Some cloud providers (notably GKE) by default disallow the scheduling of `system-node-critical` pods in any namespace but specific ones, such as `kube-system`.

Reviewer: 👍

{{< text bash >}}
$ helm install istiod istio/istiod -n istio-system --set pilot.cni.enabled=true --wait
{{< /text >}}

#### Additional configuration for the `istio-cni` component

In addition to the above basic configuration there are additional configuration flags that can be set:

* `values.cni.cniBinDir` and `values.cni.cniConfDir` configure the directory paths to install the plugin binary and create plugin configuration.
* `values.cni.cniConfFileName` configures the name of the plugin configuration file.
* `values.cni.chained` controls whether to configure the plugin as a chained CNI plugin.

Normally, these do not need to be changed, but some platforms may use nonstandard paths. Please check the guidelines for your specific platform, if any, [here](/docs/ambient/install/platform-prerequisites)

{{< tip >}}
There is a time gap between a node becomes schedulable and the Istio CNI plugin becomes ready on that node.
If an application pod starts up during this time, it is possible that traffic redirection is not properly set up and traffic would be able to bypass the Istio sidecar.

> This race condition is mitigated for the sidecar dataplane mode by a "detect and repair" method.

Reviewer 2: Nit: I think we have settled on "sidecar data plane mode", or just "sidecar mode"

Author: I tried very hard to train my brain to think `data plane` everywhere and not `dataplane` but I missed this one :sweat_smile:

|`values.cni.repair.labelPods`    | UPDATE pods | Pods are only labeled.  User will need to take manual action to resolve.                                                                      |
|`values.cni.repair.repairPods`   | None        | Pods are dynamically reconfigured to have appropriate configuration. When the container restarts, the pod will continue normal execution.     | Default in 1.21 and newer

> ### Traffic redirection parameters for sidecar dataplane mode

Reviewer 2: We did say above that this guide was only for sidecar mode.  Is this reference content for the istio-cni component that should be on another page?

Author: Yes, this is a half-assed attempt to begin segregating the contents of this guide into "sidecar" and "not-sidecar" stuff, anticipating a better future split/shared doc.
